DropDownBox: add Search in Embedded Components topic (#8854)
DevExpress/devextreme-documentation: concepts/05 UI Components/DropDownBox/20 Search in Embedded Components/00 Search in Embedded Components.md

> When using DevExtreme DropDownBox with an embedded DataGrid or TreeList component, you may want to allow users to search and filter records in the dropdown. DataGrid and TreeList include built-in search and filter UI that you can activate. You can also make the DropDownBox input field editable, so it acts as a search box for the embedded control. In that case, you need to implement custom code, because DropDownBox does not have built-in search functionality. The implementation depends on whether a lookup field is involved in search.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using DevExtreme DropDownBox with an embedded DataGrid or TreeList component, you may want to allow users to search and filter records in the dropdown. DataGrid and TreeList include a built-in search and filter UI that you can activate. You can also make the DropDownBox input field editable, so that it acts as a search box for the embedded control. In this case, you need to implement custom code, because DropDownBox does not have built-in search functionality. The implementation depends on whether a lookup field is involved in the search.
```

    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Extra data source required</td>
        <td>No</td>
        <td>Yes, a lookup data source</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Filtering logic</td>
        <td>The DataSource searches for values in fields specified in <a href="/Documentation/ApiReference/Data_Layer/DataSource/Configuration/#searchExpr">searchExpr</a></td>
        <td>You query the lookup data source by display field (for example, <code>Name contains text</code>), map results to keys, then build an <code>OR</code> filter such as <code>[EmployeeID, '=', 1] or [EmployeeID, '=', 5]</code></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Reset search on close</td>
        <td><code>dataSource.searchValue('')</code></td>
        <td><code>dataSource.filter(null)</code></td>
    </tr>
</table>

[note] These implementation strategies support single selection only. To implement multiple selection, use the [TagBox](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxTagBox '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxTagBox/') component instead.

For complete working examples, see the following GitHub repositories:

> - [DropDownBox with embedded DataGrid](https://github.com/DevExpress-Examples/devextreme-dropdownbox-filter-data-in-nested-widget) (search by regular field)

Reviewer: What do you mean by "regular field"?

Author: You were right to question it - it's an artifact left from renaming. I updated the topic

Reviewer: Thank you

> DropDownBox does not have built-in search. To add search functionality, embed a DataGrid or TreeList and implement filtering manually. The approach depends on whether you search a **regular field** or a **lookup column display value**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When using a DropDownBox with an embedded DataGrid or TreeList, you can turn the component's input field into a search/filter box. Obtain the input field text and construct a filter condition for the dropdown control. Implementation details depend on whether you search a field that holds actual values or lookup IDs.
```

Author: I would like to keep the original for these reasons:
1. "lookup IDs" is incorrect. The lookup column scenario is specifically about searching by _display value_ (e.g. an employee name). IDs is what filter resolves to _internally_
2. "a field that holds actual values" kinda doesn't mean anything because all fields hold actual values... I personally think it's more vague than a "regular field vs. lookup column"
3. The "DropDownBox does not have built-in search" sentence is crucial for me. It tells the reader why we are doing this thing in the first place. So your rewrite just loses context
4. IMHO I wouldn't put implementation details in the intro. The steps below cover the whole implementation thing and I personally think the job of the intro just to orient people on what they should choose. That's why I made a comparison table.

Reviewer 2: I'd like to start with #3 (and my explanation partly covers #4 too). I wanted to change this part, because it sounds like we failed to add a feature to our product. I don't want to give that impression that our products don't have features they are supposed to have. 

DropDownBox was never supposed to have built-in search, right? We need to say this part in a way that doesn't imply that our component is an incomplete implementation and people have to write a bunch of custom code.

We may want to mention another thing here. Since we're talking about our Grid and TreeList, we can mention their built-in search and filter capabilities. Here's an article, for example: 

https://js.devexpress.com/React/Documentation/Guide/UI_Components/DataGrid/Filtering_and_Searching/

I can probably just activate that filter row and be done with it (skip all that custom code). 

So only when I REALLY WANT to turn an input box into a search field... in an editor that accepts any control in its dropdown and never was intended to be a search control... only then should I write all that custom code. 

So we can use a longer introduction, if you really want to focus on that. Something like this:

"When using DevExtreme DropDownBox with an embedded DataGrid or TreeList component, you may want to allow users to search and filter records in the dropdown. DataGrid and TreeList implement their own search and filter UI and you can activate it. You can also make DropDownBox input field editable, and make it act like a search box for the embedded control. In that case, you need to implement custom code as described in this example. That functionality is not available out-of-the-box, since DropDownBox can accept any component in its dropdown."

Reviewer 2: Just to add to the previous message. To me, it seems like cause and effect and switched. 

"DropDownBox does not have built-in search. To add search functionality, embed a DataGrid or TreeList and implement filtering manually." 

So it looks like I start with a DropDownBox **without** an embedded DataGrid or TreeList. What's embedded then? Maybe a List? 

https://js.devexpress.com/React/Documentation/Guide/UI_Components/List/Overview/

But the developer has a problem - DropDownBox doesn't have search. Okay... looks like there's a solution. We need to change the embedded component to DataGrid or TreeList and write some code. 

But why necessarily DataGrid or TreeList? The code actually works with the data source, not the component. Any UI component should be fine in the dropdown. DataGrid or TreeList in this scenario DON'T HELP with search implementation. So we shouldn't say "to add search, embed DataGrid or TreeList".

Reviewer 2: Now about #1 and #2: 

> search a **regular field** or a **lookup column display value**

In your version it was a "field" vs a "column display value". We should compare a field to a field, a column to a column, or values to values. We can't say "search a field or value".

I'm also not a big fan of "regular". But I agree my version is not that technically correct either. Can we just say something like this? 

"depends on whether a lookup field is involved in search"

## When to Use Each Approach

<table class="dx-table">
    <tr>

>         <th>Aspect</th>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        <th>Implementation Aspect</th>
```

>         <th>Search by regular field (no lookup column involved)</th>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        <th>Search field contains values</th>
```

Author: See my first comment

>         <th>Search by lookup column display value (lookup involved)</th>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        <th>Search field contains lookup IDs</th>
```

Author: See my first comment

Reviewer 2: I'm fine with something closer to your original version, but if we say "value" in one, we should also say "value" in another. 

Maybe something like this? 

- Search field values (no lookup field involved)
- Search display text (lookup field involved)

    </tr>
    <tr>

>         <td>Typical component</td>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        <td>Embedded component</td>
```

        <td>DataGrid / TreeList</td>
        <td>DataGrid / TreeList</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>

>         <td>What user types</td>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        <td>User input contents</td>
```

Author: Are you sure it's more understandable?

Reviewer 2: This item stood out to me, because it starts with "What". If we start it with "What", then we can start the previous with "Which" - "Which component is embedded". 

So that inconsistency is what I was trying to change... Plus the full version would be "What does a user type". I didn't want to use that shortened version.

>         <td>Text that exists in the main dataset (same record).</td>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        <td>Text that matches values in the main dataset.</td>
```

Author: Kinda ambiguous. "matches values" can also be said about lookup column display values. Here I am talking about the text that exactly exists as is

Reviewer 2: My thinking here is that users always enter text, but the database maybe stores numbers or dates. So that's why "text matches values". That input string may not exist in the database as "text". 

> "matches values" can also be said about lookup column display values

If you use a lookup field/column, you have "values" and "display text". We don't usually say "display value". The real thing is "value", what you see on screen is "display text".

>         <td>Text that exists in the main dataset, a related dataset (lookup display value), or both.</td>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        <td>Text that matches values in the main dataset, a lookup dataset, or both.</td>
```

Author: See my previous comment and the comment about lookup display value

    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Main API used for search</td>
        <td><a href="/Documentation/ApiReference/Data_Layer/DataSource/Methods/#searchValuevalue">DataSource.searchValue(value)</a></td>
        <td><a href="/Documentation/ApiReference/Data_Layer/DataSource/Methods/#filterfilterExpr">DataSource.filter(filterExpr)</a></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Search fields configuration</td>
        <td><a href="/Documentation/ApiReference/Data_Layer/DataSource/Configuration/#searchExpr">searchExpr</a> specifies the field(s) to search</td>
        <td><code>searchExpr</code> is not enough for lookup display text; you must build an ID-based filter</td>

>     </tr>

Reviewer 2: I think this row is redundant... The same information is available in another row - Filtering Logic. Also, the title here say "field configuration", but then one of cells says "you cannot configure fields". 

 
```suggestion

```

    <tr>
        <td>Extra data source required</td>
        <td>No</td>

>         <td>Yes (lookup data source / store to resolve typed text &rarr; matching IDs)</td>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        <td>Yes, a lookup data source</td>
```

    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Filtering logic</td>

>         <td>The DataSource performs searching internally using <code>searchExpr</code> + <code>searchValue</code></td>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        <td>The DataSource searches for values in fields you add to <a href="/Documentation/ApiReference/Data_Layer/DataSource/Configuration/#searchExpr">searchExpr</a></td>
```

Author: Maybe:

```suggestion
        <td>The DataSource searches for values in fields specified in <a href="/Documentation/ApiReference/Data_Layer/DataSource/Configuration/#searchExpr">searchExpr</a></td>
```

>         <td>You query the lookup data source by display field (for example, <code>Name contains text</code>), map results to keys, then build an <code>OR</code> filter like <code>[EmployeeID, '=', 1] or [EmployeeID, '=', 5]</code></td>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        <td>You query the lookup data source by display field (for example, <code>Name contains text</code>), map results to keys, then build a filter that lists required IDs: <code>[EmployeeID, '=', 1] or [EmployeeID, '=', 5]</code></td>
```

Author: You kinda lost the main point here - the `OR` condition. Maybe:
```suggestion
        <td>You query the lookup data source by display field (for example, <code>Name contains text</code>), map results to keys, then build an <code>OR</code> filter such as <code>[EmployeeID, '=', 1] or [EmployeeID, '=', 5]</code></td>
```

Reviewer 2: Sure, if you really want to mention that.  I just thought it was obvious from the example filter string anyway. And it's a bit of an awkward phrase: "build an OR filter".

    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Reset search on close</td>
        <td><code>dataSource.searchValue('')</code></td>
        <td><code>dataSource.filter(null)</code></td>
    </tr>
</table>

> [note] These approaches support single selection only. To implement multiple selection, use the [TagBox](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxTagBox '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxTagBox/') component instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[note] This implementation strategies support single row selection only. To implement multiple selection, use the [TagBox](/api-reference/10%20UI%20Components/dxTagBox '/Documentation/ApiReference/UI_Components/dxTagBox/') component instead.
```

Author: Why row? It's not about rows in a grid, it's about selecting multiple items in a DropDownBox

Reviewer 2: Yeah - we can remove "row".  If the embedded component is DataGrid/TreeList, you do select "rows", right? 

If you use a TagBox, the selected "item" will appear as a "tag". But the user still selected a "row" in the embedded control. That was my thinking here. 

Anyway - no big deal if you remove the word "row".

> For complete working examples, see the GitHub repositories:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For complete working examples, see the following GitHub repositories:
```
